Title: Constrained Multi-Objective Genetic Algorithm Variants for Design and Optimization of Tri-Band Microstrip Patch Antenna loaded CSRR for IoT Applications: A Comparative Case Study

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2601.17513v1

Published Time: Tue, 27 Jan 2026 01:35:48 GMT

Number of Pages: 39

Markdown Content:
# Constrained Multi-Objective Genetic Algorithm Variants for Design and Optimization of Tri-Band Microstrip Patch Antenna loaded CSRR for IoT Applications: A Comparative Case Study 

Mohamed Hamza Boulaich, Said Ohamouddou, Mohammed Ali Ennasar, Abdellatif El Afia 

> Smart System Laboratory, ENSIAS - Mohammed V University, Rabat 10120, Morocco

Abstract 

This paper presents an automated antenna design and optimization frame-work employing multi-objective genetic algorithms (MOGAs) to investigate various evolutionary optimization approaches, with a primary emphasis on multi-band frequency optimization. Five MOGA variants were implemented and compared: the Pareto genetic algorithm (PGA), non-dominated sorting genetic algorithm with niching (NSGA-I), non-dominated sorting genetic al-gorithm with elitism (NSGA-II), non-dominated sorting genetic algorithm us-ing reference points (NSGA-III), and strength Pareto evolutionary algorithm (SPEA). These algorithms are employed to design and optimize microstrip patch antennas loaded with complementary split-ring resonators (CSRRs). A weighted-sum scalarization approach was adopted within a single-objective genetic algorithm framework enhanced with domain-specific constraint han-dling mechanisms. The optimization addresses the conflicting objectives of minimizing the return loss ( S11 < −10 dB) and achieving multi-band reso-nance at 2.4 GHz, 3.6 GHz, and 5.2 GHz. The proposed method delivers a superior overall performance by aggregating these objectives into a unified fitness function encompassing S11 (2.4 GHz), S11 (3.6 GHz), and S11 (5.2 GHz). This approach effectively balances all three frequency bands simultaneously, rather than exploring trade-off solutions typical of traditional multi-objective approaches. The antenna was printed on a Rogers RT5880 substrate with a dielectric constant of 2.2 , loss tangent of 0.0009 , and thickness of 1.57 mm . Scalarization approach achieved return loss values of −21 .56 dB, −16 .60 dB, 

> arXiv:2601.17513v1 [cs.NE] 24 Jan 2026

and −27 .69 dB, with corresponding gains of 1.96 dBi, 2.6 dB, and 3.99 dBi at 2.4 GHz, 3.6 GHz, and 5.2 GHz, respectively. 

Keywords: Complementary split-ring resonator (CSRR), antenna design/optimization, multi-objective optimization, genetic algorithm (GA), pareto GA, Non-dominated Sorting NSGA(I-II-III), strength pareto evolutionary algorithm (SPEA). 

1. Introduction 

Wireless communication has evolved rapidly-from 5G to 6G, and toward the Internet of Things (IoT)-based networks-driving antenna design and wire-less devices into unprecedented territory Boulaich et al. (2024a,b). The mi-crostrip patch antenna was first printed in 1955; however, it began receiving considerable attention in the 1970s Peixeiro (2011). This antenna consists of a dielectric substrate sandwiched between a thin metallic patch and ground plane. Various geometries serve as radiating patches for microstrip antennas, including square, rectangular, and circular. In modern communication sys-tems, rectangular patches play a crucial role due to their various advantages, including low fabrication cost, compact size, single- and multi-band frequency operation, and straightforward impedance matching. However, these struc-tures exhibit certain limitations, such as narrow bandwidth, limited power handling capacity, and low gain Gupta and Dhaliwal (2011). CSRRs are slot-type resonant structures that incorporate double-negative metamaterial properties, which can be engineered to exhibit unusual electromagnetic char-acteristics such as negative permittivity ( ε), permeability ( μ), and refractive index that do not occur in natural materials. For instance, the negative re-fractive index causes the phase and group velocity to propagate in opposite directions, resulting energy flow and electromagnetic radiation are emitted backward instead of forward Malik et al. (2022). The design and deployment of communication systems frequently neces-sitate solving complex, constrained optimization problems to achieve desired performance characteristics, including high efficiency, elevated data rates, low latency, and reliable connectivity across diverse applications such as smart cities, autonomous vehicles, and medical devices. Metaheuristic algorithms aim to address these challenges and difficulties. Recently, researchers have increasingly focused on optimization algorithms, particularly evolutionary computation techniques, which efficiently balance conflicting design objec-2tives such as minimizing antenna size while maintaining low return loss and maximizing gain. Traditional optimization methods adopt a point-by-point approach, wherein a single solution is progressively refined at each iteration, consequently yielding a single optimized solution. In contrast, evolutionary algorithms are powerful optimization tools inspired by natural selection that can solve a wide range of complex problems, particularly non-linear, multi-modal, multi-objective, and constrained optimization problems Eiben and Smith (2015). CSRRs consist of double concentric rings and squares with gaps etched into the ground plane of a microstrip patch antenna and function as quasi-static resonators. The current circulating around and within the rings gen-erates a magnetic field that effectively behaves as an inductance, whereas the gaps and inter-ring spacing act as a capacitance. The primary challenge lies in determining the optimal position of the rings with an appropriate gap size because variations in the ring parameters and gap dimensions directly influence the resonance frequency. To address this challenge, multi-objective optimization algorithms can simultaneously minimize the antenna size, de-termine the optimal CSRR position, and maintain S11 parameters below 

−10 dB at the desired frequencies. Although numerous studies have focused on single-band frequencies, multi-band frequency optimization remains rela-tively underexplored. This study presents an enhanced methodology for improving the per-formance of microstrip patch antennas loaded with CSRRs for triple-band applications. An automated antenna design methodology was developed by integrating MATLAB with CST Microwave Studio through scripting inter-faces, thereby enabling parametric optimization and simulation. A variant of the Multi-Objective Genetic Algorithm (MOGA) with constraints was em-ployed to determine the optimal position of double rings etched in the ground plane, minimize antenna size, and maintain return loss ( S11 ) below the de-sired threshold at target frequencies of 2.4 GHz, 3.6 GHz, and 5.2 GHz. The remainder of this paper is organized as follows. Section 2 reviews related work. Section 3 provides background information on the microstrip patch antennas with CSRRs and MOGA variants employed in this study. Section 4 describes the proposed antenna design and the implementation algorithm. Section 5 presents the performance results for the various MOGA scenarios. Section 6 concludes the paper. Finally, Section 7 discusses the future research directions. 32. Related Work 

Many researchers have developed various implementations of multiobjec-tive evolutionary algorithms (MOEAs), including the pareto-based genetic algorithm (PGA) by Fonseca and Fleming (1993), non-dominated sorting genetic algorithm (NSGA) by Srinivas and Deb (1994), and niched Pareto genetic algorithm (NPGA) by Horn et al. (1994). These algorithms have been applied to diverse problems, demonstrating that dominance-based MOEAs can reliably identify and maintain multiple trade-offs. Genetic algorithms (GAs) have demonstrated successful application in addressing antenna design challenges Weile and Michielssen (2002). Two notable examples of antenna design employing GAs include X-band antennas for the National Aeronautics and Space Administration (NASA) Space Technology 5 spacecraft Hornby et al. (2011) and S-band antennas for the NASA Lunar Atmosphere and Dust Environment Explorer Lohn et al. (2015). Boudjerda et al. (2022) proposed a miniaturization technique for mi-crostrip patch antennas by integrating a high-permittivity thin film as the loading element. The study employs genetic algorithms to optimize the patch dimensions, achieving a reduction in the resonance frequency from 5.8 GHz to 4.0 GHz. This optimization results in an approximately 60% reduction in the antenna area compared with conventional designs. The optimized antenna exhibits enhanced performance characteristics, including improved return loss, bandwidth, and voltage standing wave ratio (VSWR). Abouhssous et al. (2024) presented a multi-objective genetic algorithm (MOGA)-based optimization approach for miniaturizing hybrid compact-branch line couplers (BLCs) designed for 5G and IoT applications operating at 3.5 GHz. The MOGA framework was implemented to simultaneously bal-ance multiple competing design objectives, specifically maintaining electrical performance while achieving significant physical size reduction. The algo-rithm process is automated through an interface between MATLAB, which executes the MOGA, and CST Studio Suite for electromagnetic simulation via Visual Basic for Applications (VBA) scripting. The experimental valida-tion conducted on an FR-4 substrate demonstrated good agreement between the simulated and measured results, confirming the effectiveness of the pro-posed optimization methodology. Topaloğlu (2021) presented a three-dimensional (3D) electromagnetic analysis and optimization of split-ring resonators (SRRs) based on metama-terial structures. This study employed electromagnetic simulation across a 4frequency range of 1–20 GHz. A multi-objective genetic algorithm was used to optimize the design parameters, extending the negative refractive index region from 11 GHz to 15.5 GHz. The optimized SRR structure is suitable for wireless applications, fifth-generation (5G) antenna systems, and sensing technologies. Liu et al. (2024) presented a multi-objective optimization approach for microwave metamaterial absorbers that reduced the number of required eval-uations. Rather than employing evolutionary algorithms, which require nu-merous objective function evaluations and are computationally expensive, the authors utilized kriging surrogate models to approximate the objective functions. The proposed algorithm was validated against benchmark prob-lems and two well-established multi-objective optimization algorithms. Sub-sequently, it was successfully applied to the design of two broadband meta-material absorbers, demonstrating both the feasibility and improved compu-tational efficiency of the approach. These studies contribute significantly to the design and optimization of CSRR, SRR, metamaterials, microstrip patch antennas, and couplers us-ing multi-objective optimization. They commonly emphasize experimental validation. However, they typically employ only standard MOGAs without investigating algorithm variants, such as NSGA-II, NSGA-III, and SPEA. This research gap highlights the need to explore and compare these algo-rithmic variants for the design and optimization of tri-band microstrip patch antennas with CSRRs for IoT applications. The main goal of this study is to investigate various MOGAs, including the Pareto genetic algorithm (PGA), strength Pareto evolutionary algorithm (SPEA), non-dominated sorting genetic algorithm with niching (NSGA-I), non-dominated sorting genetic algorithm with elitism (NSGA-II), and non-dominated sorting genetic algorithm using reference points (NSGA-III), to optimize antenna geometry. The optimization targets the reflection coeffi-cient at multiple operating frequencies as well as the precise positioning and sizing of the CSRR rings etched in the ground plane. However, traditional MOGAs rely on a Pareto front with non-dominated solutions. Despite the diverse preserving mechanisms, elitism, niching, and reference points incor-porated in these MOGAs, the optimal solutions consistently exhibited insuf-ficient performance in targeted aspects, resulting in poor optimization out-comes and non-physical CSRR dimensions and positions. To address these limitations, our approach converts the multi-objective problem into a single-objective formulation by summing all three S-parameter magnitudes, thereby 5directly aligning with the antenna design goals to minimize the return loss at all frequencies equally. 

3. Background 

This section provides a background on MOGA and its variants. Addition-ally, it introduces microstrip patch antennas incorporating the CSRR in the ground plane, both of which were employed in this study. Many real-world en-gineering problems require simultaneous optimization of multiple conflicting objectives. Unlike single-objective optimization, which seeks a single optimal solution (i.e., a global minimum or maximum), multi-objective optimization addresses problems in which no single solution satisfies all objectives, owing to inherent trade-offs. Consequently, the goal is to identify the Pareto front set of non-dominated solutions that represents optimal trade-offs among com-peting objectives. MOGAs are therefore essential for antenna design, where engineers must balance conflicting performance metrics, such as the reflec-tion coefficient, gain, bandwidth, and physical dimensions Srinivas and Deb (1994). 

3.1. Microstrip Patch Antenna with CSRR 

Microstrip patch antennas are widely employed in modern wireless com-munication systems because of their low-profile geometry, lightweight con-struction, cost-effectiveness, and ease of integration with electronic circuits. A microstrip patch antenna comprises a thin metallic patch printed on the up-per surface of a dielectric substrate with a metallic ground plane positioned on the lower surface. The radiating patch can assume various geometries, includ-ing rectangular, circular, and triangular. A CSRR is a metamaterial-inspired structure etched into a metallic surface, consisting of one or more concen-tric rings with narrow gaps that form resonant slots. The CSRR exhibits negative permittivity ( ε-negative) resonant behavior Refaat et al. (2021). 

3.2. Pareto-based Genetic Algorithm 

The pareto-based evolutionary algorithm was first introduced by Gold-berg (1989), who proposed assigning equal reproductive probabilities to all non-dominated individuals within the population. His approach involved assigning rank 1 to non-dominated individuals before removing them from consideration, subsequently identifying the next set of non-dominated indi-viduals, and assigning them rank 2, with this process continuing iteratively. 6Fonseca and Fleming later extended this methodology by proposing a rank-ing system in which an individual’s rank is determined by the number of population members that dominate. Under their scheme, all non-dominated individuals receive an identical rank, whereas dominated individuals are pe-nalized based on the population density within the corresponding region of the trade-off surface Fonseca and Fleming (1995). Instead of assigning fitness directly to the objective values, a Pareto ranking mechanism based on dom-inance count was proposed. Fonseca and Fleming considered an individual 

xi at generation t which was dominated by nd(xi) individuals in the current population. Its rank can be given by Fonseca and Fleming (1993). 

r(xi) = 1 + nd(xi) (1) where: 

nd(xi) = |{ xj ∈ P | xj ≺ xi}| (2) In the field of electronics and communications, numerous studies have ap-plied Pareto-based optimization techniques, such as Pareto genetic algo-rithms (PGAs) and other multi-objective evolutionary algorithms, to opti-mize multiple conflicting objectives. For instance, Kerkhoff and Ling (2009) applied a Pareto genetic algorithm to optimize the design of a broadband pla-nar dipole antenna for a long wavelength array (LWA) and a low-frequency radio telescope. The algorithm simultaneously optimized the antenna radi-ation patterns and minimized the received galactic background noise while respecting the design constraints to ensure realizability and cost control. In our case, a Pareto-based approach following the Fonseca and Flem-ing framework with elitism and fitness sharing was applied to classify the solutions according to dominance. Fitness sharing is incorporated to pre-serve the population diversity and prevent premature convergence. Elitism and tournament selection were employed to retain high-quality solutions, fol-lowed by crossover and mutation operators to explore the search space. The final outcome is a Pareto front consisting of non-dominated antenna designs that represent optimal trade-offs among the considered frequency bands. Al-gorithm 1 presents the Pareto-based genetic algorithm used to optimize the antenna design. 

3.3. Non-dominated Sorting Genetic Algorithm with Niched (NSGA-I). 

The non-dominated sorting genetic algorithm (NSGA-I) is a multi-objective optimization algorithm that combines the non-dominated sorting principle 7Algorithm 1 Pareto-based Genetic Algorithm for Antenna Optimization                                       

> 1: Input: Population size N, generations G, design constraints 2: Output: Pareto front of non-dominated solutions (optimal antenna geometries) 3: Initialize antenna parameters: R1, R 2, R 3, R 4, V r, U r, W g, L g, W, L
> 4: Initialize population Pwith antenna parameters 5: for g= 1 to Gdo
> 6: for all individuals in Pdo
> 7: Evaluate EM model and compute S11 at 2.4, 3.6, and 5.2 GHz 8: end for
> 9: Apply Pareto ranking (Fonseca–Fleming) 10: Apply fitness sharing 11: Extract rank-1 solution 12: selection (elitism + tournament) 13: Apply crossover and mutation 14: Update population P
> 15: end for
> 16: return Pareto front.

with niching techniques. This algorithm applies niching mechanisms through fitness sharing to maintain the population diversity across the Pareto front. One of the most widely implemented selection techniques for genetic algo-rithms is tournament selection, in which a subset of individuals is randomly chosen from the current population, and the fittest individual from this subset is selected for the next generation. Tournament selection tends to drive the population toward a single solution over successive generations, thereby caus-ing premature convergence. To maintain multiple Pareto-optimal solutions, NSGA employs a selection mechanism based on non-dominated sorting, and fitness sharing. First, individuals were classified into different non-dominated fronts through non-dominated sorting. Second, a sharing mechanism was applied within each front to maintain diversity by reducing the fitness of individuals in crowded regions. Proportionate selection is then performed based on these shared fitness values. This approach prevents premature con-vergence and preserves the diversity along the Pareto front Srinivas and Deb (1994). The niche count ni quantifies the degree of crowding within the neighborhood (niche) surrounding individual i. This metric is computed by evaluating all individuals present in the current population. 

ni =

> n

X

> j=1

sh (dji ) (3) 8where: 

dji : is the distance between individuals i and jsh (d): is the sharing function, which maintains diversity: 

sh (dji ) = 



1 −

 dji 

σshare 

α

, dji < σ share 

0, dji ≥ σshare 

(4) where: 

σshare : Niche radius 

α: Sharing parameter The rapid growth of wireless communication technology has led to in-creased reliance on antennas in modern vehicles. Designing these anten-nas for optimal performance is challenging because it often requires balanc-ing multiple conflicting objectives, such as radiation pattern characteristics, bandwidth, and physical constraints. Kim and Walton (2006) presented a computational design approach for conformal vehicle antennas using NSGA. This method optimizes antenna geometries to achieve an improved multi-objective performance. The approach was validated through electromagnetic simulations and experimental measurements, thereby demonstrating its ef-fectiveness in vehicle antenna design applications. In this study, NSGA-I evaluates each candidate design using three ob-jectives and assigns ranks through non-dominated sorting. To preserve the population diversity and prevent convergence to a single region of the objec-tive space, a niching mechanism based on fitness sharing is employed, which reduces the fitness of closely clustered solutions. This mechanism ensures a well-distributed set of solutions along the Pareto front, thereby maintain-ing the exploration capability of the algorithm throughout the optimization process. Algorithm 2 presents the NSGA-I used to optimize the antenna design. 

3.4. Non-dominated Sorting Genetic Algorithm with Elitism (NSGA-II) 

The Elitist Non-dominated Sorting Genetic Algorithm (NSGA-II) is an improved multi-objective optimization algorithm that extends NSGA by in-corporating elitism to preserve the best solutions across generations. This algorithm employs a fast non-dominated sorting procedure to classify individ-uals into different fronts based on dominance relationships. Two approaches exist for sorting a population into different non-domination levels: naive 9Algorithm 2 Non-dominated Sorting Genetic Algorithm with Niched (NSGA-I) for Antenna Optimization  

> 1:

Input: Population size N , Generations G, Parameter constraints  

> 2:

Output: Pareto Front (Rank 1 solutions), (optimal antenna geometries)  

> 3:

Initialize antenna parameters: R1, R 2, R 3, R 4, V r, U r, W g, L g, W, L  

> 4:

Initialize population P with antenna parameters  

> 5:

for g = 1 to G do  

> 6:

Evaluate objectives ( S11 at 2.4, 3.6, 5.2 GHz) for all individuals  

> 7:

Perform Non-Dominated Sorting and assign ranks  

> 8:

Apply Fitness Sharing to maintain diversity  

> 9:

Extract Pareto Front (Rank 1)  

> 10:

Apply Tournament Selection , Crossover , and Mutation to cre-ate next generation  

> 11:

end for  

> 12:

return Pareto Front and efficient approach. The naive approach compares each solution against all others in the population with a computational complexity of O(M N 2),where N is the population size, and M is the number of objectives. To iden-tify all members of the first non-dominated front, this comparison must be performed for each individual, resulting in O(M N 2) complexity in identify-ing the first front. To identify individuals in subsequent fronts, the solutions in the first front were temporarily removed, and the sorting procedure was repeated for the remaining population. Identifying the second front also re-quires O(M N 2) comparisons, particularly when O(N ) solutions belong to the second non-dominated level. This approach is sufficient for identifying all non-domination levels. In the worst case, when there are N fronts with only one solution in each front, the overall complexity is O(M N 3) Deb et al. (2002). Multi-objective evolutionary algorithms have been applied in the field of satellite communications to optimize broadband reflector antenna designs. Bora et al. (2012) proposed a Non-dominated Sorting Genetic Algo-rithm based on Reinforcement Learning (NSGA-RL), which is an improved version of the NSGA-II that integrates a parameter-free self-tuning approach using reinforcement learning. NSGA-RL was applied to a satellite coverage optimization problem and compared with the classical NSGA-II and other multi-objective optimization methods. In the present study, NSGA-II evaluates antenna geometry by incorporat-10 ing CSRR structures and ground/patch dimensions through full-wave elec-tromagnetic simulations. The algorithm applies fast non-dominated sorting to classify solutions according to Pareto dominance principles. Elitism is en-sured by combining the parent and offspring populations and selecting the best solutions based on their dominance rank. This mechanism enables the algorithm to converge toward a well-distributed Pareto front that represents the optimal trade-offs among the targeted operating frequencies. Algorithm 3 presents the NSGA-II used to optimize the antenna design. 

Algorithm 3 Non-dominated Sorting Genetic Algorithm with Elitism (NSGA-II) for Antenna Optimization  

> 1:

Input: Population size N , Generations G, Parameter constraints  

> 2:

Output: Pareto Front (optimal antenna geometries)  

> 3:

Initialize antenna parameters: R1, R 2, R 3, R 4, V r, U r, W g, L g, W, L  

> 4:

Initialize population P with antenna parameters  

> 5:

for g = 1 to G do  

> 6:

Evaluate objectives ( S11 at 2.4, 3.6, 5.2 GHz)  

> 7:

Apply Fast Non-Dominated Sorting  

> 8:

Generate offspring via Selection, Crossover, Mutation  

> 9:

Combine parent and offspring populations  

> 10:

Select best N individuals using rank  

> 11:

end for  

> 12:

return Pareto Front 

3.5. Non-dominated Sorting Genetic Algorithm with Reference Points (NSGA-III) 

NSGA-III extends NSGA-II by introducing a reference-point-based se-lection mechanism, representing a significant modification to the original algorithm for multi-objective optimization. Although the crowding distance mechanism in NSGA-II effectively maintains diversity in bi- and tri-objective problems, it becomes ineffective when addressing problems with a large num-ber of objectives. NSGA-III overcomes this limitation by employing a prede-fined set of reference points to guide the population toward a well-distributed Pareto front. This approach achieves improved diversity, enhanced uniform coverage of high-dimensional objective spaces, and better convergence behav-ior, making it particularly suitable for multi-objective problems with four or more objectives. 11 The NSGA-III ensures solution diversity through a predetermined set of reference points distributed on a normalized hyperplane. These refer-ence points can be either user–specified or systematically generated using structured placement strategies. The reference points are positioned on an 

(M − 1) -dimensional unit simplex with unit intercepts on each axis, main-taining an equal inclination to all objective axes. For an M -objective op-timization problem, the total number of reference points ( H) is determined based on p divisions along each objective axis Deb and Jain (2013): 

H =

M + p − 1

p



(5) For example, in a three-objective problem ( M = 3 ), reference points are created on a triangle with vertices at (1 , 0, 0) , (0 , 1, 0) , and (0 , 0, 1) . If four divisions ( p = 4 ) are selected for each objective axis. 

H =

3 + 4 − 14



(6) Frequency-selective surface design presents significant optimization chal-lenges, and NSGA-III has been widely adopted to address these complex-ities. Zheng et al. (2025) proposed a systematic inverse-design method for miniaturizing frequency-selective surfaces (FSSs) using microwave network theory and equivalent circuit models. A multi-objective optimization prob-lem was formulated and solved using NSGA-III. The method successfully generated three highly miniaturized FSS designs: single-band transmissive FSS, single-band reflective FSS, and a multi-band reflective FSS. In this study, NSGA-III applies non-dominated sorting and utilizes a set of predefined reference points to guide the environmental selection process, thereby ensuring a well-distributed Pareto front in the objective space. Algo-rithm 4 presents the NSGA-III procedure employed to optimize the antenna design. 

3.6. Strength Pareto Evolutionary Algorithm (SPEA) 

The strength Pareto evolutionary algorithm (SPEA) is a multi-objective optimization technique designed to identify high-quality Pareto solutions. SPEA combines traditional evolutionary algorithm methods, such as mu-tation, crossover, and selection, which are common techniques employed in 12 Algorithm 4 Non-dominated Sorting Genetic Algorithm with Reference Points (NSGA-III) for Antenna Optimization  

> 1:

Input: Population size N , generations G, design constraints  

> 2:

Output: Pareto-optimal antenna solutions  

> 3:

Initialize antenna parameters: R1, R 2, R 3, R 4, V r, U r, W g, L g, W, L  

> 4:

Generate reference points using Das–Dennis method  

> 5:

Initialize population P with antenna parameters  

> 6:

for g = 1 to G do  

> 7:

Evaluate population using EM simulation  

> 8:

Compute objectives: S11 at 2.4, 3.6, and 5.2 GHz  

> 9:

Perform non-dominated sorting  

> 10:

Generate offspring via crossover and mutation  

> 11:

Combine parent and offspring populations  

> 12:

Update population P 

> 13:

end for  

> 14:

return Pareto Front (Rank-1 solutions) most genetic algorithms. It is specifically designed for multi-objective op-timization and incorporates an external archive that stores the best non-dominated solutions Ishibuchi and Murata (1996) and a strength fitness assignment mechanism, where each solution receives a score based on the number of other solutions it dominates Zitzler and Thiele (2002). In the present study, the SPEA maintained an external archive to store non-dominated solutions, ensuring the preservation of Pareto-optimal de-signs throughout the evolutionary process. Each individual in the combined population and archive is assigned a strength and fitness value based on dominance relationships. This approach ultimately produces a set of diverse Pareto-optimal antenna configurations that balance performance across all target frequencies. Algorithm 5 presents the SPEA procedure employed to optimize the antenna design. Table 1 presents a comparative review of five widely employed MOGA variants applied in antenna design and optimization, namely Pareto GA, NSGA-I, NSGA-II, NSGA-III, and SPEA. The comparison highlights their strengths and limitations with respect to the essential criteria for electromag-netic optimization, including diversity preservation, elitism, and suitability for multi-objective antenna scenarios. 13 Algorithm 5 Strength Pareto Evolutionary Algorithm (SPEA) for Antenna Optimization  

> 1:

Input: Population size N , archive size ¯N , generations G 

> 2:

Output: External archive (Pareto Front)  

> 3:

Initialize population P and external archive ¯P 

> 4:

for g = 1 to G do  

> 5:

Evaluate antenna designs using EM simulation  

> 6:

Compute objectives: S11 at 2.4, 3.6, and 5.2 GHz  

> 7:

Combine population and archive  

> 8:

Assign strength and fitness values  

> 9:

Update external archive with non-dominated solutions  

> 10:

Apply selection, crossover, and mutation  

> 11:

Update population P 

> 12:

end for  

> 13:

return External archive ¯P

4. The Proposed Approach 

In brief, we developed an automated methodology for designing a mi-crostrip patch antenna with a CSRR that features a gap etched in the ground plane. The design and optimization process were implemented us-ing MATLAB-CST integration and constrained MOGAs. The optimization objectives included determining the optimal CSRR position and achieving size reduction while maintaining a reflection coefficient below −10 dB at the target frequencies of 2.4 GHz, 3.6 GHz, and 5.2 GHz. Five variants of multi-objective GAs were investigated: PGA, NSGA-I, NSGA-II, NSGA-III, and SPEA. We adopt a weighted-sum scalarization approach within a single-objective framwork to address the limitations and challenges inherent in these algorithms. 

4.1. System Architecture 

As depicted in figure 1, our architecture integrates two distinct software components, MATLAB and CST. Each component fulfills a specific role within the workflow. MATLAB serves as the optimization and data pre-processing engine for the antenna design process, whereas CST functions as a full-wave electromagnetic simulator. The Application Programming Inter-face API enables MATLAB to control CST automatically, facilitating seam-less integration between the two platforms. 14 Table 1: Well-known multi-objective genetic algorithm variants 

Ref Algorithm Fitness Elitism Niching External archive Advantage disadvantage 

Koziel and Pietrenko-Dabrowska (2021) PGA Rank based on level of Pareto dominance NO NO NO 

• Low computa-tional cost 

• Clear objective 

• Multi-objective optimization 

• Method details lacking 

• Complex termi-nology 

• No quantitative results Srinivas and Deb (1994) NSGA-I Pareto rank + sharing NO Yes NO • Fast conver-gence 

• Problems re-lated to niche size parameter Zhao et al. (2021) NSGA-II Pareto rank + crowding distance Yes NO NO 

• Fast conver-gence 

• Efficient multi-objective opti-mization 

• Good diversity in Pareto solu-tions 

• Requires param-eter tuning for NSGA-II 

• Validation sometimes limited to simulation 

• Computational cost for moderate Uluslu (2024) NSGA-III Pareto rank + reference point YES NO NO 

• Reduced com-putational cost 

• Reliable and efficient solution 

• Handles multi-dimensional parameters well 

• Risk of con-vergence to local minima 

• Difficult to handle very high-dimensional problems 

• Performance depends on simu-lator accuracy Suhanya et al. (2013) SPEA Strength value (dominance count) YES NO YES 

• Good sidelobe suppression 

• Suitable for ran-dom/irregular ar-rays 

• Efficient Pareto approximation 

• Higher compu-tational cost 

• Parameter tun-ing required 

• Slower conver-gence 

The workflow comprises six sequential stages. 

First , candidate antenna geometries with CSRRs are generated, includ-ing parameters such as ring radii ( R1, R2, R3, R4), gap sizes ( g1, g2), patch dimensions ( Wg, Lg, Wp, Lp), and position variables ( Vr, Ur). as well as the substrate, patch, and ground plane material properties and the associated constraints and objective functions. 15 Figure 1: The architecture of our proposed approach 

Second , a genetic algorithm and multi-objective optimization methods are implemented, followed by the evaluation of fitness functions, including S11 

performance at multiple frequencies, bandwidth, and constraint satisfaction. 

Third , the geometric parameters were created inside the CST through the API. 

Fourth , the electromagnetic simulation engine in CST computes all elec-tromagnetic characteristics of the antenna. 

Fifth , data retrieval and post-processing were performed to extract S-parameters, frequency responses, and current distributions from the CST output files (ASCII tables), and performance indicators ( S11 , gain) were com-puted. 

Finally , decision-making for optimization is executed by selecting the best geometry according to the specified constraints and design objectives. 

4.2. Design and Implementation. 4.2.1. Antenna Structure and Configuration 

First, we present a rectangular microstrip patch antenna operating at 5.2 GHz , which is selected as the reference antenna for the initial design. The primary physical dimensions of the reference antenna included the width, length, and thickness of the radiation patch: Wp = 22 .8 mm, Lp = 18 .55 mm , and hp = 35 μm, respectively. These dimensions determine the fundamental operating frequency and impedance behavior of the antenna. The antenna was printed on a dielectric substrate characterized by a relative permittivity (εr = 2 .2) and loss tangent ( tan δ = 0 .0009 ) corresponding to the Rogers 16 Figure 2: Reference microstrip patch antenna at 5.2 GHz (a) Geometry, (b) Reflection Coefficient S11 

RT5880 material. The dielectric constant controls the miniaturization level and electromagnetic confinement within the structure, whereas the loss tan-gent quantifies the material losses and influences the antenna efficiency. A microstrip feed line with dimensions Wf = 4 .85 mm and Lf = 14 .3

mm was implemented to achieve a 50 Ω characteristic impedance, providing proper impedance matching of the antenna. The microstrip feed line is inset toward the patch at D = 5 .02 mm and is separated by two gaps of equal width S = 3 .1 mm. Figure 2 (a) shows the antenna structure and Figure 2 (b) shows the antenna resonating at 5.2 GHz. 

4.2.2. Development of the Microstrip Patch Antenna 

The proposed antenna is developed using a multi-stage design process. The two principal stages are illustrated in Figure 3(a) and (b). In the first stage, an initial ring with a gap is etched and implemented as a defective ground structure (DGS) to introduce a new resonant frequency at 2.4 GHz. The antenna performance was further enhanced by etching the CSRR struc-ture into the ground plane. The CSRR position was determined not by the current distribution within the ground plane, but rather by a constrained MOGA. Furthermore, the CSRR dimensions were optimized using this al-gorithm to achieve resonant frequencies within the desired frequency bands 17 while maintaining reflection coefficient S11 below −10 dB. In the second stage, the objective was to introduce an additional resonant frequency of 3.6 GHz, thereby enabling tri-band resonant operation. To achieve this objective, a second CSRR with a gap is designed and incorporated. This modification enables the antenna to exhibit enhanced multiband characteristics and im-proved performance without increasing its physical dimensions. The para-metric studies conducted throughout these stages demonstrated the influence of the number of rings on the generation of the resonance frequencies and the corresponding S11 performance. The initial dimensions of the proposed antenna prior to the MOGA optimization, calculated using mathematical formulations, are listed in Table 2. 

> Table 2: Units and values of the proposed antenna parameters.

Parameter Value (mm) parameter Value (mm) 

WS 41.64 R1 12.38 

LS 37.93 R2 11.88 

h 1.57 R3 8.25 

Wp 22.8 R4 7.75 

Lp 18.55 d1 0.5 

Lf 14.3 d2 0.5 

Wf 4.85 s 5

D 5.02 gap 1.5 

S 3.1 εr 2.2 

4.3. Proposed Algorithm 

In this study, a modified genetic algorithm was developed to converts the multi-objective antenna optimization problem into a single-objective for-mulation using weighted-sum scalarization, enhanced with constraint-repair mechanisms and elitist preservation strategies. In addition, various MOGAs have been investigated, including PGA, NSGA-I, NSGA-II, NSGA-III, and SPEA. These algorithms were applied to optimize antenna geometry. The optimization process targeted the position and dimensions of the double rings with gaps in the CSRR structure, aiming to reduce the antenna size while maintaining the reflection coefficient S11 below −10 dB at specific frequencies of 2.4 GHz, 3.6 GHz, and 5.2 GHz. 18 Figure 3: Evolution of the microstrip patch antenna with CSRR: (a) Stage 1, (b) Stage 2, (c) schematic representation of the proposed multiband antenna, and (d) reflection coef-ficient S11 for the various design stages. 

The proposed algorithm addresses the limitations of previous multiobjec-tive algorithms in achieving optimal CSRR positioning within the ground 19 START 

Initialize antenna parameters 

W, L, W f , L g , W g ,R1, R 2, R 3, R 4, U r , V r

Initialize Population 

N = 10 

Generation 1 to 10 

Evaluate Individuals i = 1 to 10 

Run Simulation myFunction 

(W, L, W f , L g , W g ,R1, R 2, R 3, R 4, U r , V r )

3 Objectives 

S11 at 2.4, 3.6, 5.2 GHz 

Calculate Fitness 

F = |S11 ,2.4| +

|S11 ,3.6| + |S11 ,5.2|

All Done? 

Find Best Individual (Max Fitness) 

Update Overall Best Solution 

Last Gen? 

Output Best Solution 

Elitism Keep Best Individual 

Tournament Selection 

Crossover + Mutation 

New Population 

END 

> Yes
> No
> Yes
> No

Flowchart of the Scalarized MOGA Optimization 

Algorithm 6 Single-Objective (Scalarized Multi-Objective Genetic Algorithm) for Antenna Optimiza-tion 

1: Input: Population size N = 10 , Generations G = 10 , Parameters constraints, antenna parameters: R1, R 2, R 3, R 4, V r , U r , W g , L g , W, L 

2: Output: Best solution (optimal antenna parameters) 

3: Initialize antenna parameters: R1, R 2, R 3, R 4, V r , U r , W g , L g , W, L 

4: Initialize population P with N individuals 

5: bestSolution ← ∅ , bestF itness ← −∞ 

6: for g = 1 to G do 

7: for i = 1 to N do 

8: Run simulation: myFunction (R1, R 2, R 3, R 4, V r , U r , W g , L g , W, L )

9: Calculate 3 objectives: S11 at 2.4, 3.6, 5.2 GHz 

10: Scalarization (MOGA approach): 

11: Fi = |S11 ,1|+|S11 ,2|+|S11 ,3| (aggregate multiple objectives) 

12: end for 

13: Find best individual: best g ← arg max i Fi

14: if Fbest g > bestF itness then 

15: Update overall best: bestSolution ← P [best g ]

16: bestF itness ← Fbest g

17: end if 

18: if g = G then 

19: Output bestSolution 

20: break 

21: end if 

22: Elitism: Pnew [1] ← bestSolution 

23: for i = 2 to N do 

24: Tournament selection to choose parents 

25: Crossover parents to create offspring 

26: Mutation of offspring 

27: Pnew [i] ← offspring 

28: end for 

29: Update population: P ← Pnew 

30: end for 

31: return bestSolution with bestF itness 

Algorithmic Description 

20 plane and their dimensions for antenna size reduction, while maintaining 

S11 performance at 2.4 GHz, 3.6 GHz, and 5.2 GHz. Unlike traditional Pareto-based methods that maintain multiple solutions, the proposed MOGA converts a multi-objective problem into a single fitness function by summing the S11 values at these frequencies, thereby enabling convergence toward a single optimal solution. The algorithm incorporates elitist selection to preserve the best individu-als across generations, combined with binary tournament selection for parent selection and standard crossover/mutation operations for offspring genera-tion. This approach provides superior convergence characteristics for antenna optimization problems, where a single best-compromise solution is preferred over a Pareto front, particularly when addressing conflicting objectives, such as minimizing return loss across multiple frequencies while simultaneously reducing antenna dimensions and optimizing CSRR placement within the ground plane. The weighted-sum strategy facilitates the fine-tuning of the relative im-portance assigned to different frequency bands and design constraints, ren-dering it particularly suitable for practical antenna design applications where engineering trade-offs must be explicitly defined. The algorithm flowchart and details are presented below. 

5. Results and Discussion 

The automated design methodology for microstrip patch antennas with CSRR was implemented following the framework proposed by Haupt (2008). This approach investigates an automated antenna design by optimizing the dimensions of the patch, substrate, ground plane, and CSRR etched into the ground plane. Employing optimization techniques such as MOGA enables the determination of optimal CSRR positioning and dimensions, thereby re-ducing the antenna size while maintaining the performance metric S11 < −10 

dB. In this study, we converted the multi-objective antenna optimization problem into a single-objective formulation using weighted-sum scalariza-tion, enhanced with constraint-repair mechanisms and elitist preservation strategies. 

5.1. Experimental Setup. 

Figure 4(a) shows that the patch geometry is based on a rectangular struc-ture with a centrally located narrow slot extending toward the feed line. This 21 Figure 4: Geometry of the proposed antenna: (a) top view and (b) bottom view 

slot divides the lower portion of the patch into two equal sections, effectively modifying the surface current distribution and enabling a multi-band opera-tion. Figure 5(b) illustrates the ground plane, which incorporates a DGS that behaves similar to a CSRR formed by two concentric circular slots. Each ring contains a narrow gap positioned on the opposite side to maintain symmetry. When excited by an electromagnetic field, currents circulate around the rings of the CSRR structure in response to incident electromagnetic waves. These circulating currents generate a magnetic field that manifests as an inductive effect. The metallic rings, separated by dielectric gaps, form capacitive el-ements where the electric field concentrates, creating capacitance between the adjacent conductive surfaces. The gaps in the rings are critical features in which the electric fields are strongly concentrated, producing significant capacitive effects. Additionally, Figure 5 illustrates the simulated return loss S11 of the pro-posed antenna and the algorithm over the frequency range of 0 GHz to 7 GHz. The blue curve shows the tri-band operation encompassing all the three tar-get frequencies. The deepest resonances occur at approximately 2.4 GHz and 5.2 GHz, with values of −21 .56 dB and −27 .69 dB, respectively, making them particularly well-optimized for these bands. At 3.6 GHz, the algorithm achieves a minimum S11 of −16 .60 dB, demonstrating stable resonance and effective power transfer for 5G applications. The design successfully covered multiple wireless communication standards, including Wi-Fi, 5G, and IoT applications. Figure 6 illustrates the E- and H-plane 2D polar plots of the far-field ra-diation pattern of the antenna. Figure 6(a) shows the E-plane in the vertical 22 Figure 5: Reflection Coefficient S11 of the Proposed Antenna 

(elevation cut) plane, where ϕ = 0 ◦ and ϕ = 180 ◦ are fixed and θ varies from 

0◦ to 360 ◦. The vertical axis represents the angle of radiation and the hori-zontal axis represents the maximum gain. The orange curve shows the lowest gain, the green curve shows the intermediate gain, and the blue curve shows the largest pattern with the highest gain. Figure 6(b) shows the H-plane in the horizontal direction (azimuth cut), illustrating how the antenna radiates in a plane perpendicular to the electric field polarization. The H-plane is taken at θ = 90 ◦ using polar coordinates with an azimuth angle ϕ rang-ing from 0◦ to 360 ◦. All three patterns exhibited multiple lobes distributed around the azimuth, indicating a complex radiation behavior in the H-plane. The pattern at 5.2 GHz shows different directional characteristics compared with those at the other two frequencies. 

5.2. Influence of Various MOGA Performance Metrics 

In this study, we evaluate the performance metrics of different MOGA. We employ generational distance (GD) Coello and Cortés (2005) and inverted generational distance (IGD) Wang et al. (2024) as performance metrics in our experiments. Both metrics can be explained as follows: the variable d repre-sents the Euclidean distance between design points in the multi-dimensional parameter space (patch length, width, slot dimensions, CSRR radius, gap 23 Figure 6: Measured farfield radiation patterns: (a) E-plane ( ϕ = 0 ) and (b) H-plane (θ = 90 ) at 2.4, 3.6, and 5.2 GHz 

size, etc.). Variable A represents the current antenna design, containing the actual structural parameters (dimensions, material properties, and geome-try), and P ∗ represents the optimal antenna design, containing the ideal parameter values that the optimization algorithm is attempting to reach. The metrics GD and IGD respectively defined as: GD (A, P ∗) = 1

|A|

vuut |A|

X

> i=1

d2 

> i

(7) IGD (A, P ∗) = 1

|P ∗|

vuut|P ∗|

X

> i=1

d2 

> i

(8) where |A| denotes the cardinality of set A, |P ∗| denotes the cardinality of the optimal Pareto front P ∗, and di denotes the Euclidean distance from a solution point to the nearest point in the reference set. Figure 7 illustrates the reflection coefficient versus frequency response, demonstrating the comparative performance of the six different optimization approaches across the 1–7 GHz frequency range. The blue curve represents the Pareto-based GA, which exhibits resonances at approximately 2.4 GHz, 3.6 GHz, and 5.2 GHz, with moderate return loss values around −10 to 

−20 dB. This algorithm provides multi-band operation, but with a limited impedance matching depth. The non-dominated sorting GA variants (I, II, III; green, black, and gray curves) display varying degrees of optimization 24 Figure 7: Performance comparison of multi-objective genetic algorithm variants for the reflection coefficient S11 

success, with different resonance frequencies and bandwidth characteristics. These approaches showed good performance with less consistency across all bands. The pink curve represents the SPEA, which exhibits deep resonance at certain frequencies but shows narrow bandwidths and may not cover all the desired frequency bands. The red curve represents our proposed algorithm, which shows excellent matching characteristics with S11 values well below 

−10 dB at the desired frequencies of 2.4 GHz, 3.6 GHz, and 5.2 GHz. Figure 8 shows the voltage standing wave ratio (VSWR) versus the fre-quency response. This figure illustrates the impedance-matching perfor-mance of six optimization approaches across a frequency range of 1–7 GHz frequency range. Lower VSWR values (ideally, < 2) indicate better impedance matching and efficient power transfer. The Pareto-based GA showed sta-ble performance with minimal fluctuations, indicating reasonable impedance matching throughout the spectrum. This algorithm demonstrates accept-able VSWR performance with 1.8 < VSWR < 2.2 at target frequencies of 2.4, 3.6, and 5.2 GHz. The non-dominated sorting GA variants (I, II, III; green, black, and gray curves) demonstrate good VSWR performance with values in the range 1.2 < VSWR < 1.8 across most desired frequencies. The SPEA displays moderate VSWR performance with a significant peak around 4.5 GHz, where the VSWR reaches approximately 55 at the target 25 Figure 8: Performance comparison of multi-objective genetic algorithm variants for the VSWR 

frequencies. Our proposed algorithm exhibits distinctive characteristics with an extremely low VSWR ( < 1.5), indicating very rich impedance matching at the target frequencies. Figure 9 illustrates the GD metric, which measures the proximity of the obtained solutions to the true Pareto-optimal front, where lower GD val-ues indicate superior convergence toward optimal solutions. The Pareto GA exhibits an unstable pattern, with peaks at generations 3-9 (GD ≈ 0.35 ), indicating poor consistency and difficulty in maintaining proximity to the optimal front. By Generation 10, the GD converges to approximately 0.27 , which represents a relatively poor performance compared to the other meth-ods. The NSGA-I begins with high GD values ranging from 0.40 to 0.44 throughout all generations, demonstrating the poorest overall convergence performance. In contrast, NSGA-II exhibits good and stable convergence characteristics. Starting at GD ≈ 0.42 (generation 1), the algorithm demon-strates consistent monotonic improvement, steadily decreasing to GD ≈ 0.37 

by generation 10 . The NSGA-III displayed excellent convergence with mod-erate stability. Beginning at GD ≈ 0.29 , the algorithm initially shows a slight deterioration to GD ≈ 0.23 around generation 5, then stabilizes at approx-imately GD ≈ 0.22 by generation 8, and further improves to GD ≈ 0.19 at generation 10. Finally, the SPEA exhibits a distinctive convergence pattern but experiences premature termination at generation 7, preventing complete 26 performance evaluation. Starting at GD ≈ 0, the algorithm shows an initial increase to GD ≈ 0.37 at generation 2, followed by rapid improvement. the SPEA demonstrates dramatic but unstable convergence, reaching GD ≈ 0.1

by generation 5, and approximately GD ≈ 0.35 at generation 7 . Figure 10 illustrates the IGD metric, which evaluates convergence quality, and solution diversity. The Pareto GA displays highly erratic and unstable behavior with severe oscillations throughout the optimization process. The algorithm oscillates between IGD ≈ 0.13 and 0.58 , with a final value of approximately IGD ≈ 0.35 at generation 10 . This highly unstable pattern suggests that the algorithm struggles to maintain convergence and diversity simultaneously. The three Non-dominated sorting genetic algorithm variants demonstrated distinct performance characteristics in IGD convergence. NSGA-I exhibited the most predictable behavior, with moderate IGD values ranging from 0.38 to 0.45 , maintaining consistent stability throughout all generations, despite 

> Figure 9: Generational distance (GD) Performance of Multi-Objective Genetic Algorithm Variants

27 Figure 10: Inverted generational distance (IGD) Performance of Multi-Objective Genetic Algorithm Variants 

not achieving the lowest values. NSGA-II provides excellent stability with a flat profile (IGD ≈ 0.37 –0.41 ) and sustained low values, demonstrating re-liable convergence and solution diversity suitable for practical applications. NSGA-III achieves superior performance with the lowest IGD values (0.18– 0.23), combining exceptional stability with continuous improvement to reach IGD ≈ 0.18 at generation 10, making it the most effective algorithm for balancing convergence quality and solution diversity in multi-objective an-tenna optimization. The SPEA shows moderate performance with notable instability and fluctuating behavior. While the SPEA occasionally achieves competitive IGD values, substantial fluctuations suggest difficulty in main-taining stable convergence and diversity across generations. Figure 11 illustrates the dual performance metrics of the proposed scalar-ized MOGA, tracking both the convergence speed (blue curve, left axis) and population diversity (red curve, right axis) across 10 generations. The al-gorithm demonstrated a rapid initial convergence phase, followed by sta-28 Figure 11: Analysis of convergence speed and population diversity of the proposed scalar-ized multi-objective genetic algorithm for tri-Band antenna optimization 

bilization. The final convergence speed of approximately 0.2 at genera-tion 10 indicates that the algorithm has reached a stable optimal solution set with minimal fitness improvements in later generations. Population di-versity, measured by the standard deviation of the solutions, shows a dy-namic exploration-exploitation balance. The consistently high diversity val-ues (mostly above 15.3 on average) throughout the optimization process demonstrate that the proposed MOGA successfully avoids premature con-vergence and maintains a well-distributed solution set. Table 3 presents a comparative analysis of the different optimization al-gorithms. The table displays the optimized antenna parameters, and their corresponding values along with the average size reduction achieved. Addi-tionally, the operating frequencies and associated reflection coefficients S11 

were reported to evaluate the electromagnetic performance of each optimized design. This comparison demonstrates the effectiveness of the algorithms un-der consideration for achieving compact antenna structures while maintaining an acceptable impedance matching. 29 Table 3: Comparison of antenna parameters and performance metrics for different algorithms 

Proposed algorithm Antenna parameters Value (mm) Average antenna size reduction Frequency (GHz) S11 (dB) 

PGA 

Wg 40.70 19.45% 2.4 -16.02 Lg 35.94 

Wp 21.70 

Lp 16.44 3.6 -34.23 R1 9.70 

R2 8.65 

R3 4.95 5.2 -1.15 

R4 4.41 NSGA-I 

Wg 38.88 7.39% 2.4 -1.924 Lg 36.89 

Wp 22.66 

Lp 16.56 3.6 -5.367 R1 12.38 

R2 11.34 

R3 6.94 5.2 -0.775 

R4 6.36 NSGA-II 

Wg 40.36 9.90% 2.4 -16.34 Lg 34.05 

Wp 20.24 

Lp 16.96 3.6 -33.81 R1 12.00 

R2 10.82 

R3 7.33 5.2 -0.98 

R4 5.97 NSGA-III 

Wg 41.20 9.11% 2.4 -32.81 Lg 34.81 

Wp 20.18 

Lp 16.56 3.6 -10.52 R1 11.41 

R2 11.00 

R3 7.69 5.2 -10.72 

R4 6.25 SPEA 

Wg 38.30 15.96% 2.4 -24.94 Lg 36.17 

Wp 20.16 

Lp 17.40 3.6 -12.52 R1 12.20 

R2 11.35 

R3 6.94 5.2 -10.41 

R4 6.40 

Our Proposed 

Wg 38.28 16.29% 2.4 -21.56 Lg 34.10 

Wp 20.36 

Lp 16.22 3.6 -16.60 R1 12.02 

R2 11.34 

R3 6.91 5.2 -27.69 

R4 6.40 

30 5.3. Comparison with Previous Work 

The proposed algorithm demonstrates superior performance compared with existing multi-objective optimization approaches for tri-band antenna design. While the Pareto-based GA exhibited severe instability with erratic convergence patterns and poor final performance and NSGA-I showed consis-tent but suboptimal results with high GD (≈ 0.42) and IGD (≈ 0.39) values, the proposed method achieved significantly better outcomes. Compared to NSGA-II, which provided good stability but moderate convergence quality, and NSGA-III, which achieved the best performance among the conventional methods with GD ≈ 0.19 and IGD ≈ 0.18 . The proposed scalarized MOGA offers a more balanced optimization strategy. The algorithm’s rapid conver-gence speed (average of 7.29) combined with sustained population diversity (average of 15.3) enabled it to effectively explore the solution space while avoiding premature convergence. In terms of antenna performance, the proposed method achieves deeper resonances at target frequencies (2.4, 3.6, and 5.2 GHz) with S11 values below 

−10 dB and VSWR ≈ 1.2–1.5, outperforming all the compared algorithms. Although the SPEA showed promising early convergence in GD analysis, its premature termination and instability in IGD metrics make it unreliable, whereas the proposed method maintains consistent performance throughout all generations, establishing it as the most effective and robust solution for multi-band antenna optimization. Table 4 presents a comparative analysis of the proposed antenna and those of previous studies. 

6. Conclusion 

In this study, we developed an automated methodology for the design and optimization of microstrip patch antennas loaded with complementary split-ring resonators (CSRRs) using co-simulation between MATLAB and CST-API. The reference antenna, operating at 5.2 GHz for IoT applica-tions, was designed in three stages: a zero-stage microstrip patch antenna, a first-stage single-ring configuration etched in the ground plane operating at 3.6 GHz, and a second-stage double-ring configuration operating at 5.2 GHz. The antenna was fabricated on a Rogers RT5880 substrate with a dielec-tric constant of 2.2, a loss tangent of 0.0009 , and a thickness of 1.57 mm. We applied and investigated five constrained multi-objective genetic algo-rithms (MOGAs), including PGA, NSGA(I-II-III), and PSEA, to optimize the double-ring geometry with a gap position etched in the ground plane. 31 These algorithms served as defective ground structures (DGSs) to reduce the antenna size while maintaining a return loss below −10 dB at the desired tri-band frequencies of 2.4 GHz, 3.6 GHz, and 5.2 GHz. 

Table 4: Comparison of the Proposed Antenna Design with Previous Studies 

Ref Method Frequency (GHz) S11 (dB) Maximum Gain (dBi) Dimension (mm 3)

Rajebi et al. (2024) PSO 0.432 -22 - 128 ×121 ×2.1 Yang et al. (2024) NSGA-II 2.45 -29 - 55 ×62 ×1Lotfi et al. (2017) Standard GA 2.5 -25 7.5 165 ×85 ×0.8 Jiang et al. (2022) Standard GA 2.4 -12 - 65 ×65 ×1Qiao et al. (2023) GA 2.6 -11 5.48 53 ×50 ×1.6 Jing et al. (2022) GA 2.45 -41 4.8 95 ×125 ×1.52 Refaat et al. (2021) Current distribution within ground plane 2.42, 5.22, 5.92 -29.7, -33.9, -24.7 8.18 55.5 ×42.75 ×1.5 Sarmah et al. (2020) GA+ANN 2.4, 3.4 -16, -20 2.1 42.2 ×35 ×1.5 Boudjerda et al. (2022) GA 4 -30 3.63 30.4 ×25.5 ×1.6 Mohammed et al. (2016) PSO+FA 3.1–14.2 -10 - 21.5 ×12 ×1.6 Ma and Liu (2025) NSGA-II 8.3–11 -30 0.65–8.5 41.9 ×41.9 ×1.6 

Our proposed Scalarized MOGA 2.4, 3.6, 5.2 -21.56, -16.60, -27.69 3.99 38.74 ×35.39 ×1.57 

We propose a novel scalarized multi-objective algorithm that transforms multiple objectives into a single fitness function while preserving the input parameters and constraints within the same optimization framework. This algorithm achieved optimal antenna dimensions and ring positions while 32 maintaining return loss values of −21 .56 dB, −16 .60 dB, and −27 .69 dB, with corresponding gains of 1.96 dBi, 2.6 dBi, and 3.99 dBi at the desired frequencies of 2.4 GHz, 3.6 GHz, and 5.2 GHz, respectively. The optimization process employed a randomly initialized population of 

N = 10 , where each individual antenna geometry was generated using a uni-form random distribution within predefined parameter constraints to ensure physically realizable designs. 

7. Future Work 

Although our proposed algorithm and workflow have been successfully implemented for co-simulation to reduce antenna size, determine the optimal position of the double-ring with gap etched in the ground plane, and main-tain return loss below −10 dB while maximizing gain at desired frequencies, several areas require further improvement. In the following sections, we dis-cuss the key issues and limitations that remain to be addressed in future work. The first issue in the optimization process is that the scalarized MOGA cannot achieve or enhance the frequency precision at 3.6 GHz below −16 .60 dB. The algorithm considers the optimal value at 3.58 GHz to be −22 .30 dB rather than 3.6 GHz exactly. The second issue concerns the MATLAB–CST co-simulation process, in which it was not possible to save all ASCII tables of antenna radiation patterns at specific frequencies for every individual in the population to build a comprehensive dataset. Only the optimal solution was successfully stored, including the gain, directivity, and 2D polar plot radiation patterns. This issue arises from the lack of proper synchronization between MATLAB and CST at each iteration of the optimization algorithm, whereas synchronization is correctly achieved only for the final optimal solu-tion. A significant limitation of this study is the absence of a comparison be-tween the simulation and the experimental analysis. Because the study did not fabricate and test the antenna, we could not validate some material prop-erties that are currently unavailable in the simulation. The second constraint is the limited population size and number of generations, which we plan to increase in future studies to achieve more optimal solutions. In our future work, we will focus on employing alternative algorithms to reduce the number of iterations and enhance optimization performance. These approaches include various fuzzy logic controllers and hidden Markov 33 models with the ultimate goal of implementing reinforcement learning to control the hyperparameters of the genetic algorithm. We believe that this represents the most effective approach for exploiting the optimization land-scape and achieving superior antenna designs. 

Declaration of Generative AI and AI-Assisted Technologies 

During the preparation of this manuscript, the author(s) used Claude to assist in generating and refining a paragraph with the objectives of improving academic English, clarity, sentence structure, and consistency in intonation. After using this tool, the author(s) carefully reviewed, edited, and validated the generated content and take(s) full responsibility for the accuracy, origi-nality, and integrity of the published article. 

References 

M. Boulaich, S. Ohamouddou, H. Meliani, M. Enassar and A. EL afia, An advanced Technology Utilizing IoT and Machine Learning to Predict Power Consumption , in Mediterranean Smart Cities Conference (MSCC), Tetuan, 2024. M. Boulaich, S. Ohamouddou, H. Meliani, M. Enassar and A. El afia, New Approach: Intelligent System-Based Object Detection in Smart Parking , in Mediterranean Smart Cities Conference (MSCC), Tetuan, 2024. C. Peixeiro, Microstrip patch antennas: An historical perspective of the de-velopment , in 2011 SBMO/IEEE MTT-S International Microwave and Op-toelectronics Conference (IMOC 2011), IEEE, pp. 684-688, October 2011. V. Gupta and B. S. Dhaliwal, Performance enhancement of recangular mi-crostrip patch antenna by loading complementary split ring resonator in the patch , International Journal of Electronics Engineering, vol. 3, no. 1, pp. 141-143, 2011. P. K. Malik, A. Naim, and R. Singh (Eds.), Printed Antennas: Design and Challenges , CRC Press, 2022. A. E. Eiben and J. E. Smith, What is an evolutionary algorithm? In In-troduction to evolutionary computing , Springer Berlin Heidelberg, Berlin, Heidelberg, pp. 15-35, 2015. 34 C. M. Fonseca and P. J. Fleming, Genetic algorithms for multiobjective op-timization: formulation discussion and generalization , in Icga, vol. 93, no. July, pp. 416-423, July 1993. N. Srinivas and K. Deb, Muiltiobjective optimization using nondominated sorting in genetic algorithms , Evolutionary computation, vol. 2, no. 3, pp. 221-248, 1994. J. Horn, N. Nafpliotis, and D. E. Goldberg, A niched Pareto genetic algorithm for multiobjective optimization , in Proceedings of the first IEEE conference on evolutionary computation. IEEE world congress on computational in-telligence, IEEE, pp. 82-87, June 1994. D. S. Weile and E. Michielssen, Genetic algorithm optimization applied to electromagnetics: A review , IEEE Transactions on Antennas and Propa-gation, vol. 45, no. 3, pp. 343-353, 2002. G. S. Hornby, J. D. Lohn, and D. S. Linden, Computer-automated evolution of an X-band antenna for NASA’s space technology 5 mission , Evolutionary computation, vol. 19, no. 1, pp. 1-23, 2011. J. D. Lohn, D. S. Linden, B. Blevins, T. Greenling, and M. R. Allard, Au-tomated synthesis of a lunar satellite antenna system , IEEE Transactions on Antennas and Propagation, vol. 63, no. 4, pp. 1436-1444, 2015. M. Boudjerda, A. Reddaf, A. Kacha, K. Hamdi-Cherif, T. E. Alharbi, M. S. Alzaidi, and S. S. Ghoneim, Design and optimization of miniaturized microstrip patch antennas using a genetic algorithm , Electronics, vol. 11, no. 14, p. 2123, 2022. K. Abouhssous, L. Wakrim, A. Zugari, and A. Zakriti, A multi-objective genetic algorithm approach applied to compact meander branch line cou-plers design for 5G-enabled IoT applications , Journal of Computational Electronics, vol. 23, no. 3, pp. 634–646, 2024. İ. Topaloğlu, 3D electromagnetic analysis and optimization of metamaterial constructed by SRR using the MOGA algorithm for performance improve-ment , Düzce Üniversitesi Bilim ve Teknoloji Dergisi, vol. 9, no. 3, pp. 34-47, 2021. 35 S. Liu, C. Pei, X. Ye, H. Wang, F. Wu, and S. Tao, Efficient sampling strategy driven surrogate-based multi-objective optimization for broadband microwave metamaterial absorbers , Journal of Systems Engineering and Electronics, vol. 35, no. 6, pp. 1388-1396, 2024. S. M. Refaat, A. Abdalaziz, and E. K. Hamad, Tri-band slot-loaded microstrip antenna for internet of things applications , Advanced electromagnetics, vol. 10, no. 1, pp. 21-28, 2021. C. M. Fonseca and P. J. Fleming, An overview of evolutionary algorithms in multiobjective optimization , Evolutionary computation, vol. 3, no. 1, pp. 1-16, 1995. A. Kerkhoff and H. Ling, Design of broadband antenna elements for a low-frequency radio telescope using Pareto genetic algorithm optimization , Ra-dio Science, vol. 44, no. 06, pp. 1-11, 2009. Y. Kim and E. K. Walton, Automobile conformal antenna design us-ing non-dominated sorting genetic algorithm (NSGA) , IEE Proceedings-Microwaves, Antennas and Propagation, vol. 153, no. 6, pp. 579-582, 2006. K. Deb, A. Pratap, S. Agarwal, and T. A. M. T. Meyarivan, A fast and elitist multiobjective genetic algorithm: NSGA-II , IEEE transactions on evolutionary computation, vol. 6, no. 2, pp. 182-197, 2002. T. C. Bora, L. Lebensztajn, and L. D. S. Coelho, Non-dominated sorting genetic algorithm based on reinforcement learning to optimization of broad-band reflector antennas satellite , IEEE transactions on magnetics, vol. 48, no. 2, pp. 767-770, 2012. K. Deb and H. Jain, An evolutionary many-objective optimization algorithm using reference-point-based nondominated sorting approach, part I: solving problems with box constraints , IEEE transactions on evolutionary compu-tation, vol. 18, no. 4, pp. 577-601, 2013. W. Zheng, Y. Yang, T. X. Feng, and H. Li, Systematic Inverse Design of Miniaturized Frequency Selective Surfaces Based on Microwave Network Theory and NSGA-III , IEEE Transactions on Microwave Theory and Tech-niques, 2025. 36 H. Ishibuchi and T. Murata, Multi-objective genetic local search algorithm ,in Proceedings of IEEE international conference on evolutionary compu-tation, IEEE, pp. 119-124, May 1996. E. Zitzler and L. Thiele, Multiobjective evolutionary algorithms: a compar-ative case study and the strength Pareto approach , IEEE transactions on Evolutionary Computation, vol. 3, no. 4, pp. 257-271, 2002. S. Koziel and A. Pietrenko-Dabrowska, Rapid multi-criterial antenna opti-mization by means of Pareto front triangulation and interpolative design predictors , IEEE Access, vol. 9, pp. 35670–35680, 2021. N. Srinivas and K. Deb, Muiltiobjective optimization using nondominated sorting in genetic algorithms , Evolutionary computation, vol. 2, no. 3, pp. 221-248, 1994. J. Zhao, X. Chao, T. Hong, P. Wang, and S. Zheng, Efficient directional antenna design suitable for ubiquitous power internet of things , Electronics, vol. 10, no. 13, p. 1521, 2021. A. Uluslu, Additional Acceleration of Antenna Optimal Characterization with Modeling Support , Applied Computational Electromagnetics Society Jour-nal (ACES), pp. 396-404, 2024. S. Jayaprakasam, S. K. Rahim, and C. Y. Leow, A PARETO ELITE SE-LECTION GENETIC ALGORITHM FOR RANDOM ANTENNA AR-RAY BEAMFORMING WITH LOW SIDELOBE LEVEL , Progress In Electromagnetics Research B, vol. 51, 2013. R. L. Haupt, Using MATLAB to control commercial computational elec-tromagnetics software , Applied Computational Electromagnetics Society Journal (ACES), pp. 98-103, 2008. C. A. C. Coello and N. C. Cortés, Solving multiobjective optimization prob-lems using an artificial immune system , Genetic programming and evolv-able machines, vol. 6, no. 2, pp. 163-190, 2005. Z. Wang, C. Xiao and A. Zhou, Exact Calculation of Inverted Generational Distance , IEEE Transactions on Evolutionary Computation, 2024. 37 S. Rajebi, S. Pedrammehr, K. I. A. L. Al-Abdullah, H. Asadi, and C. P. Lim, 

An optimized microstrip antenna to generate intense localized heating at target sites for maximum effect , Discover Applied Sciences, vol. 6, no. 5, p. 235, 2024. Q. Yang, H. Wang, and X. Peng, Performance-constrained multi-objective optimization of antennas for miniaturization design , Scientific Reports, vol. 14, no. 1, p. 21497, 2024. P. Lotfi, S. Soltani, and R. D. Murch, Printed endfire beam-steerable pixel antenna , IEEE Transactions on Antennas and Propagation, vol. 65, no. 8, pp. 3913-3923, 2017. F. Jiang, Z. Zhang, M. Li, S. Shen, C. Y. Chiu, Y. Zhang, and R. Murch, 

Multiport pixel antenna optimization using characteristic mode analysis and sequential feeding port search , IEEE Transactions on Antennas and Propagation, vol. 70, no. 10, pp. 9160-9174, 2022. T. Qiao, F. Jiang, S. Shen, Z. Zhang, M. Li, C. Y. Chiu, and R. Murch, Pixel antenna optimization using the adjoint method and the method of moving asymptote , IEEE Transactions on Antennas and Propagation, vol. 71, no. 3, pp. 2873-2878, 2023. L. Jing, M. Li, and R. Murch, Compact pattern reconfigurable pixel antenna with diagonal pixel connections , IEEE Transactions on Antennas and Prop-agation, vol. 70, no. 10, pp. 8951-8961, 2022. S. M. Refaat, A. Abdalaziz, and E. K. Hamad, Tri-band slot-loaded microstrip antenna for internet of things applications , Advanced electromagnetics, vol. 10, no. 1, pp. 21-28, 2021. K. Sarmah, S. Goswami, and S. Baruah, Surrogate Model Assisted Design of CSRR Structure using Genetic Algorithm for Microstrip Antenna Appli-cation , Radioengineering, vol. 29, no. 1, 2020. H. J. Mohammed, F. Abdulsalam, A. S. Abdulla, R. S. Ali, R. A. Abd-Alhameed, J. M. Noras, and A. M. Abdalla, Evaluation of genetic al-gorithms, particle swarm optimisation, and firefly algorithms in antenna design , in 2016 13th international conference on synthesis, modeling, anal-ysis and simulation methods and applications to circuit design (SMACD), IEEE, pp. 1-4, June 2016. 38 Z. Ma and J. Liu, An Improved NSGA-II Algorithm for Multi-Objective Op-timization of Irregular Polygon Patch Antennas , Micromachines, vol. 16, no. 7, p. 786, 2025. D. E. Goldberg, Genetic Algorithms in Search, Optimization, and Machine Learning , Addison-Wesley, 1989. 39